contributing: Add instructions on unit tests (#916)
OSGeo/grass-addons: UNIT_TESTS.md

# Unit Tests

> Besides the code of the module itself, it is important to submit in addition a
> suite of tests. They guarantee your add-on remains functional when changes are
> applied to the code on which it depends. Once committed to GitHub, the unit
> tests are run automatically by the CI/CD pipeline every time the code in the
> repository is modified. Notifications are issued if a modification somehow
> impacts your add-on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to the code of the module itself, it is important to include a suite of
tests. They guarantee that your add-on will remain functional when changes are
applied to the code on which it depends. Once committed to GitHub, the unit
tests are automatically run by the CI/CD pipeline every time the code in the
repository is modified. Notifications are issued if a modification somehow
affects your add-on.
```

## Requirements

The unit tests depend on software that you must install in your system

> beforehand: Subversion and the GRASS development files. On a packaged operating

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
beforehand: Subversion and the GRASS development package. On a packaged operating
```

> system like Ubuntu or Debian Linux this can be achieved with:

Reviewer 3: The confusion to me here is that this is for existing addons while it is assuming that the contributor has zero setup. These things also apply for development of addons.

Author: I had to install these packages only to run the tests. They are not necessary to run the local version of the add-on on my system (Ubuntu 22.04 with Ubuntu-Gis PPA). I will remove the reference to `subversion` in any case, following Markus' comment above.

Author: I modified this section in 0574f7287634ba26a4e334e07f326273b7153311. I left the reference to `grass-dev`, I am able to run and install the add-on without it.

Reviewer 3: grass-dev is needed for C and C++ tools.

```bash

> sudo apt install subversion grass-dev

Reviewer: Shall we omit "subversion" here? It may just add confusion and is usually no longer needed:

https://github.com/OSGeo/grass/pull/2895

Author: Reference to subversion removed in 0574f7287634ba26a4e334e07f326273b7153311

```

If you have not done so yet, it is also helpful to install pre-commit. Follow
[the
instructions](https://github.com/OSGeo/grass/blob/main/doc/development/submitting/submitting.md#use-pre-commit)
in the main GRASS repository.

## Create a unit test

Unit tests must be stored in a subfolder named `testsuite` inside the add-on

> folder. For example, if you contributed a raster module named r.mymodule you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
folder. For example, if you contributed a raster module named `r.mymodule` you
```

would run:

```bash
cd src/raster/r.mymodule
mkdir testsuite
```

Then you can create a new Git branch and initiate a new unit test class:

```bash
git checkout new-branch
vim testsuite/test_mymodule.py
```

The [unit testing

> documentation](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass82/manuals/libpython/gunittest_testing.html)

Reviewer 2: can we change grass82 to grass-stable so it's always up to date?

Author: Fixed links in 00b011192429dd0c6a494d9364ef642e465c832c

in the GRASS Reference Manual provides an overview on how to create unit tests
for C/C++ and Python code. Going through existing unit tests of a module
like
[r.sun](https://github.com/OSGeo/grass/blob/main/raster/r.sun/testsuite/test_rsun.py)
is also insightful.

## Run a unit test

In most circumstances you will wish to run the unit tests against a local
version of the add-on that you recently modified or created. To do so you need
to install this local version on your GRASS installation, as in the example
below.

```bash
grass /home/user/GRASSDATA/location/mapset
g.extension r.mblend url=/home/user/git/grass-addons/src/raster/r.mymodule

> ```

Reviewer 3: Split these two and create separate descriptions. This may help you to clarify that the below also runs inside a session.

Author: Modified in 0574f7287634ba26a4e334e07f326273b7153311

You can then run the unit tests from the GRASS session, for example:

```bash

> python3 testsuite/test_mymodule.py

Reviewer 3: python means python3 for most people. I don't want to update this line once v4 comes.

Author: Good point, changed the command in 0574f7287634ba26a4e334e07f326273b7153311.

As a side note, by default the command `python` fails on Ubuntu 22.04. But that is distro specific.

Reviewer: OT: this you can fix with:

```
# recommended to give Python3 precedence over Python2 (which is end-of-life since 2019)
sudo update-alternatives --install /usr/bin/python python /usr/bin/python3 1
```

```

## Submit a unit test

The [general contribution
guidelines](https://github.com/OSGeo/grass-addons/blob/grass8/CONTRIBUTING.md#changing-code-and-documentation)

> apply to unit tests. To facilitate the work of the reviewer it is better to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
apply to unit tests. To facilitate the work of reviewers it is better to
```

> submit the unit tests in a dedicated pull request.

Reviewer 3: For existing addons. For new tools, please submit together.

Author: Modified this paragraph in 0574f7287634ba26a4e334e07f326273b7153311

# Unit Tests

In addition to the code of the module itself, it is important to include a suite of
tests. They guarantee that your add-on will remain functional when changes are
applied to the code on which it depends. Once committed to GitHub, the unit
tests are automatically run by the CI/CD pipeline every time the code in the
repository is modified. Notifications are issued if a modification somehow
affects your add-on.

## Requirements

The unit tests depend on the GRASS development package. It might already be

> installed on your system, but make sure. On a packaged operating system like
> Ubuntu or Debian Linux this can be achieved with:
> 
> ```bash
> sudo apt install grass-dev
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
installed on your system, but make it sure. On a packaged operating system like
Ubuntu or Debian Linux this can be achieved with:

```bash
sudo apt install grass-dev
```

and on Fedora/Centos with:

```bash
sudo dnf install grass-devel
```

```

Author: Addressed with 8f5b672576d1b085c64d207d22b9a75daa331c54
